The [[California]] labor movement jolted with energy. 5% of the total unions in California came from [[San Jose]]. Our city was slowly becoming the union city it is today.

As our city has solidarity with others across the Bay, on October 1, the [[San Francisco Building Trades Council]] issued a statement that its members were to work 8-hours a day for $3/day. 27 unions would be unaffected by this statement except for the millmen. The [[millmen]] in [[San Jose]], [[Santa Clara]], and other [[Bay Area]] cities joined the efforts, and they demanded an 8-hour day. From 19 mills from [[Oakland]], [[Berkeley]], [[Hayward]], San Jose, Santa Clara, and more, 8,000 men joined the cause.

Around this time, [[Progressive Era]] reformers won seats in the government. They were part of many organizations like the [[Good Government League]], the [[New Charter Club]], and the [[Women’s Civic Study League]], which attacked the power of bosses, railroads, utilities, monopolies. They also misdirected their attacks on immigration.

Because of their policies, the voters replaced them in [[1914]]. This election had substantial ramifications for the workers’ and progressive movements. The newly elected city council immediately reshaped the government in order to minimize the power of progressive and grassroots-level organizing. They introduced an entirely new city charter, which created the “[[council-manager]]” form of government we have today.

In this new city structure, the mayor and city council transformed into a legislative body that can pass policy, but not execute its own laws. The city manager, an unelected position, became responsible for the day-to-day operations of the city, and he or she has the sole authority to execute the laws. The city charter reduced the mayor to a figurehead. In the 1950s, [Anthony Hamann]] used his city manager authority to expand San Jose’s city boundaries by forcing the surrounding communities to link up with the San Jose Water Company. He denied them access to water if they did not allow him to annex their land. With this new city charter, the city manager remains the most powerful and unelected bureaucrat in our city.