October 29, [[1970]]. [[Richard Nixon]] instigated a [[riot]] in [[San Jose]].

During the 1960s, San Jose was part of what was colloquially known as [[The Radical Triangle]]. It was an area that stretched from [[San Francisco State College]] to [[UC Berkeley]], [[San Jose State College]], and [[Stanford University]]. It was a period in which radical student protests erupted frequently. Forces like the [[Weathermen]], the [[Revolutionary Union]], and the [[Black Panthers]] dominated the scene. These groups targeted corporations, the military, the police, and universities.

Unemployment and tight political races helped shape the political and economic conditions that would become the riot. In 1970, [[Santa Clara County]] was one of the key counties for the upcoming midterm elections, and President Richard Nixon wanted the [[Republican Party]] to remain incumbents. The races were tight as the Democratic and Republicans fought for seats in the 19th and 9th Districts respectively. Additionally, like the rest of America, Santa Clara County experienced de-industrialization as the [[Ames Research Center]] in [[Mountain View]] closed down. The county lost roughly 10,000 jobs at this time. A disgruntled workforce and head-to-head elections laid the foundations for a tumultuous time in San Jose.

On October 23, Nixon announced he intended to visit San Jose, specifically the [[Civic Auditorium]] on San Carlos. Immediately, student and radical groups like the [[Peace and Freedom Party]], the [[Santa Clara County Workers Committee]], the [[San Jose Liberation Front]], the [[Radical Action Movement]], and the [[Revolutionary Union]] vowed to protest the president. They intended to charge him with "crimes against the vast majority of the people of the world." They developed plans to assemble peacefully and denounce the president.

On the night of October 29, nearly 1,000 students and protesters assembled at Seventh and San Carlos for a rally. They heard speakers from the Peace and Freedom Party, [[United Farm Workers]], and the Revolutionary Union as they denounced Nixon for his policies related to the Vietnam War and his support for the Shah of Iran. The speakers reiterated the need to keep the protests well-mannered and they marched towards the Civic Auditorium. Upon arriving, they chanted "1, 2, 3, 4 / We don't want a fucking war." They surrounded the building and protested. They also held signs commenting on the need for higher wages and expressing frustration with the 7.2% unemployment rate.

The anti-Nixon demonstration went smoothly until Nixon left the building. Before entering his motorcade, he stood on the hood of the limousine and flashed his famous V sign at the crowd. Immediately, the protesters responded with a hail of rocks and eggs aimed at the president. Nixon escaped into his car and fled the scene. Protesters threw a barrage of rocks and other items they had lying around at the exiting vehicles. The police responded by attacking the protesters. They arrested four individuals amid the melee. A riot emerged as student protesters began to jump on cars, battled the cops, and destroyed property. Eventually, the crowd dispersed.

The next day, the national press condemned the anti-Nixon rally. Some called it an example of the "viciousness of the lawless elements in our society." Other commenters described the event as a war zone. The national media focused on the violence and they predicted the impact it would have on the upcoming elections. The press noted that the four individuals arrested were not San Jose State College students.

On November 3, 1970, for the midterm elections, Republicans swept all state offices save for one. Some believe that Nixon intentionally instigated the crowd to guarantee a Republican victory in the state of [[California]].
